Update Static files doc (#18846)
dotnet/AspNetCore.Docs: aspnetcore/fundamentals/static-files.md

The <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.WebHost.CreateDefaultBuilder%2A> method sets the content root to the current directory:

[!code-csharp[](~/fundamentals/static-files/samples/3x/sample/Program2.cs?name=snippet_Main)]

The preceding code was created with the web app template.

Static files are accessible via a path relative to the [web root](xref:fundamentals/index#web-root). For example, the **Web Application** project templates contain several folders within the `wwwroot` folder:

* `wwwroot`
  * `css`
  * `js`
  * `lib`

Consider creating the *wwwroot/images* folder and adding the *wwwroot/images/MyImage.jpg* file. The URI format to access a file in the `images` folder is `https://<hostname>/images/<image_file_name>`. For example, `https://localhost:5001/images/MyImage.jpg`

### Serve files in web root

> The default web app templates call <xref:Owin.StaticFileExtensions.UseStaticFiles%2A> method in `Startup.Configure`, which enables static files to be served:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default web app templates call the <xref:Owin.StaticFileExtensions.UseStaticFiles%2A> method in `Startup.Configure`, which enables static files to be served:
```

* `wwwroot`
  * `css`
  * `images`
  * `js`
* `MyStaticFiles`
  * `images`
    * `red-rose.jpg`

A request can access the `red-rose.jpg` file by configuring the Static File Middleware as follows:

[!code-csharp[](~/fundamentals/static-files/samples/3x/sample/StartupRose.cs?name=snippet&highlight=14-21)]

In the preceding code, the *MyStaticFiles* directory hierarchy is exposed publicly via the *StaticFiles* URI segment. A request to `https://<hostname>/StaticFiles/images/red-rose.jpg` serves the *red-rose.jpg* file.

The following markup references *MyStaticFiles/images/red-rose.jpg*:

```html
<img src="~/StaticFiles/images/red-rose.jpg" class="img" alt="A red rose." />
```

### Set HTTP response headers

A <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.StaticFileOptions> object can be used to set HTTP response headers. In addition to configuring static file serving from the [web root](xref:fundamentals/index#web-root), the following code sets the `Cache-Control` header:

[!code-csharp[](~/fundamentals/static-files/samples/3x/sample/StartupAddHeader.cs?name=snippet&highlight=14-23)]

> Static files are publicly cacheable for 600 seconds in the Development environment:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Static files are publicly cacheable for 600 seconds:
```

![Response headers showing the Cache-Control header has been added](static-files/_static/add-header.png)

## Static file authorization

The Static File Middleware doesn't provide authorization checks. Any files served by it, including those under `wwwroot`, are publicly accessible. To serve files based on authorization:

* Store them outside of `wwwroot` and any directory accessible to the Static File Middleware.

> * Serve them via an action method to which authorization is applied. Return a [FileResult](/dotnet/api/microsoft.aspnetcore.mvc.fileresult) object:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Serve them via an action method to which authorization is applied and return a [FileResult](/dotnet/api/microsoft.aspnetcore.mvc.fileresult) object:
```

  [!code-csharp[](static-files/samples/1x/Controllers/HomeController.cs?name=snippet_BannerImageAction)]

## Directory browsing

> Directory browsing allows directory listing and files within specified directories. Directory browsing is disabled by default for security reasons, see [Considerations](#sc). Enable directory browsing with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Directory browsing allows directory listing within specified directories.

Directory browsing is disabled by default for security reasons. For more information, see [Considerations](#sc).

Enable directory browsing with:
```

* <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.DependencyInjection.DirectoryBrowserServiceExtensions.AddDirectoryBrowser%2A> in `Startup.ConfigureServices`.
* [UseDirectoryBrowser](/dotnet/api/microsoft.aspnetcore.builder.directorybrowserextensions.usedirectorybrowser#Microsoft_AspNetCore_Builder_DirectoryBrowserExtensions_UseDirectoryBrowser_Microsoft_AspNetCore_Builder_IApplicationBuilder_Microsoft_AspNetCore_Builder_DirectoryBrowserOptions_) in `Startup.Configure`.

[!code-csharp[](~/fundamentals/static-files/samples/3x/sample/StartupBrowse.cs?name=snippet&highlight=4,20-34)]

The preceding code allows directory browsing of the *wwwroot/images* folder using the URL `https://<hostname>/MyImages`, with links to each file and folder:

![directory browsing](static-files/_static/dir-browse.png)

> See [Security considerations](#sc) on the security risks when enabling browsing.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I think this can be dropped, because it's called out before the code example, and my previous suggestion makes that a bit more prominent, too.

<!-- TODO review:  Doesn't need two `UseStaticFiles` calls
test via  webBuilder.UseStartup<StartupBrowse>(); 
and navigate to the privacy page
Note the two `UseStaticFiles` calls in the following example. The first call enables the serving of static files in the `wwwroot` folder. The second call enables directory browsing of the *wwwroot/images* folder using the URL `https://<hostname>/MyImages`.

> -->

Reviewer: I don't understand this. Is it outdated, or referencing another code sample? I don't see two `UseStaticFiles` calls in the rendered output.

## Serve default documents

> Setting a default page provides visitors a starting point on a site. To serve a default page from `wwwroot` without a fully qualified URI, call the <xref:Owin.DefaultFilesExtensions.UseDefaultFiles%2A>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Setting a default page provides visitors a starting point on a site. To serve a default page from `wwwroot` without a fully qualified URI, call the <xref:Owin.DefaultFilesExtensions.UseDefaultFiles%2A> method:
```

[!code-csharp[](~/fundamentals/static-files/samples/3x/sample/StartupEmpty.cs?name=snippet&highlight=14)]

`UseDefaultFiles` must be called before `UseStaticFiles` to serve the default file. `UseDefaultFiles` is a URL rewriter that doesn't serve the file.

With `UseDefaultFiles`, requests to a folder in `wwwroot` search for:

* *default.htm*
* *default.html*
* *index.htm*
* *index.html*

The first file found from the list is served as though the request were the fully qualified URI. The browser URL continues to reflect the URI requested.

The following code changes the default file name to *mydefault.html*:

[!code-csharp[](~/fundamentals/static-files/samples/3x/sample/StartupDefault.cs?name=snippet2)]

The following code shows `Startup.Configure` with the preceding code:

[!code-csharp[](~/fundamentals/static-files/samples/3x/sample/StartupDefault.cs?name=snippet)]

### UseFileServer for default documents

<xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.FileServerExtensions.UseFileServer*> combines the functionality of `UseStaticFiles`, `UseDefaultFiles`, and optionally `UseDirectoryBrowser`.

> The call `app.UseFileServer` enables the serving of static files and the default file. Directory browsing isn't enabled. The following code shows `Startup.Configure` with `UseFileServer`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Call `app.UseFileServer` to enable the serving of static files and the default file. Directory browsing isn't enabled. The following code shows `Startup.Configure` with `UseFileServer`:
```

[!code-csharp[](~/fundamentals/static-files/samples/3x/sample/StartupEmpty2.cs?name=snippet&highlight=14)]

> The following code enables default documents and directory browsing:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following code enables the serving of static files, the default file, and directory browsing:
```

```csharp
app.UseFileServer(enableDirectoryBrowsing: true);
```

The following code shows `Startup.Configure` with the preceding code:

> [!code-csharp[](~/fundamentals/static-files/samples/3x/sample/StartupEmpty3.cs?name=snippet&highlight=14)]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[!code-csharp[](~/fundamentals/static-files/samples/3x/sample/StartupEmpty3.cs?name=snippet&highlight=14-18)]
```

Consider the following directory hierarchy:

* `wwwroot`
  * `css`
  * `images`
  * `js`
* `MyStaticFiles`
  * `images`
    * `MyImage.jpg`
  * `default.html`

> The following code enables static files, default files, and directory browsing of `MyStaticFiles`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following code enables the serving of static files, the default file, and directory browsing of `MyStaticFiles`:
```

<xref:Microsoft.Extensions.DependencyInjection.DirectoryBrowserServiceExtensions.AddDirectoryBrowser%2A> must be called when the `EnableDirectoryBrowsing` property value is `true`.

Using the file hierarchy and preceding code, URLs resolve as follows:

| URI            |      Response  |
| ------- | ------|
| `https://<hostname>/StaticFiles/images/MyImage.jpg` | *MyStaticFiles/images/MyImage.jpg* |
| `https://<hostname>/StaticFiles` | *MyStaticFiles/default.html* |

If no default-named file exists in the *MyStaticFiles* directory, `https://<hostname>/StaticFiles` returns the directory listing with clickable links:

![Static files list](static-files/_static/db2.png)

<xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.DefaultFilesExtensions.UseDefaultFiles*> and <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.DirectoryBrowserExtensions.UseDirectoryBrowser*> perform a client-side redirect from the target URI without a trailing `/`  to the target URI with a trailing `/`. For example, from `https://<hostname>/StaticFiles` to `https://<hostname>/StaticFiles/`. Relative URLs within the *StaticFiles* directory are invalid without a trailing slash (`/`).

## FileExtensionContentTypeProvider

> The [FileExtensionContentTypeProvider](/dotnet/api/microsoft.aspnetcore.staticfiles.fileextensioncontenttypeprovider) class contains a `Mappings` property serving as a mapping of file extensions to MIME content types. In the following sample, several file extensions are registered to known MIME types. The *.rtf* extension is replaced, and *.mp4* is removed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [FileExtensionContentTypeProvider](/dotnet/api/microsoft.aspnetcore.staticfiles.fileextensioncontenttypeprovider) class contains a `Mappings` property that serves as a mapping of file extensions to MIME content types. In the following sample, several file extensions are mapped to known MIME types. The *.rtf* extension is replaced, and *.mp4* is removed:
```

[!code-csharp[](~/fundamentals/static-files/samples/3x/sample/StartupFileExtensionContentTypeProvider.cs?name=snippet2)]

The following code shows `Startup.Configure` with the preceding code:

> [!code-csharp[](~/fundamentals/static-files/samples/3x/sample/StartupFileExtensionContentTypeProvider.cs?name=snippet)]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[!code-csharp[](~/fundamentals/static-files/samples/3x/sample/StartupFileExtensionContentTypeProvider.cs?name=snippet&highlight=14-42)]
```

This might be a bit long for a highlight; I'm suggesting it just for consitency.

See [MIME content types](https://www.iana.org/assignments/media-types/media-types.xhtml).

## Non-standard content types

> Static File Middleware understands almost 400 known file content types. If the user requests a file with an unknown file type, Static File Middleware passes the request to the next middleware in the pipeline. If no middleware handles the request, a *404 Not Found* response is returned. If directory browsing is enabled, a link to the file is displayed in a directory listing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Static File Middleware understands almost 400 known file content types. If the user requests a file with an unknown file type, the Static File Middleware passes the request to the next middleware in the pipeline. If no middleware handles the request, a *404 Not Found* response is returned. If directory browsing is enabled, a link to the file is displayed in a directory listing.
```

The following code enables serving unknown types and renders the unknown file as an image:

[!code-csharp[](~/fundamentals/static-files/samples/3x/sample/StartupServeUnknownFileTypes.cs?name=snippet2)]

The following code shows `Startup.Configure` with the preceding code:

> [!code-csharp[](~/fundamentals/static-files/samples/3x/sample/StartupServeUnknownFileTypes.cs?name=snippet)]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[!code-csharp[](~/fundamentals/static-files/samples/3x/sample/StartupServeUnknownFileTypes.cs?name=snippet&highlight=14-18)]
```

With the preceding code, a request for a file with an unknown content type is returned as an image.

> [!WARNING]
> Enabling [ServeUnknownFileTypes](/dotnet/api/microsoft.aspnetcore.builder.staticfileoptions.serveunknownfiletypes#Microsoft_AspNetCore_Builder_StaticFileOptions_ServeUnknownFileTypes) is a security risk. It's disabled by default, and its use is discouraged. [FileExtensionContentTypeProvider](#fileextensioncontenttypeprovider) provides a safer alternative to serving files with non-standard extensions.

## Serve files from multiple locations

> `UseStaticFiles` and `UseFileServer` defaults to the file provider pointing at `wwwroot`. Additional instances of `UseStaticFiles` and `UseFileServer` can be provided with other file providers to serve files from other locations. For more information, see [this GitHub issue](https://github.com/dotnet/AspNetCore.Docs/issues/15578).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`UseStaticFiles` and `UseFileServer` default to the file provider pointing at `wwwroot`. Additional instances of `UseStaticFiles` and `UseFileServer` can be provided with other file providers to serve files from other locations. For more information, see [this GitHub issue](https://github.com/dotnet/AspNetCore.Docs/issues/15578).
```

<a name="sc"></a>

### Security considerations for static files

> [!WARNING]
> `UseDirectoryBrowser` and `UseStaticFiles` can leak secrets. Disabling directory browsing in production is highly recommended. Carefully review which directories are enabled via `UseStaticFiles` or `UseDirectoryBrowser`. The entire directory and its sub-directories become publicly accessible. Store files suitable for serving to the public in a dedicated directory, such as `<content_root>/wwwroot`. Separate these files from MVC views, Razor Pages, configuration files, etc.

> * The URLs for content exposed with `UseDirectoryBrowser` and `UseStaticFiles` are subject to the case sensitivity and character restrictions of the underlying file system. For example, Windows is case insensitive, macOS and Linux aren't.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The URLs for content exposed with `UseDirectoryBrowser` and `UseStaticFiles` are subject to the case sensitivity and character restrictions of the underlying file system. For example, Windows is case insensitive, but macOS and Linux aren't.
```

> * ASP.NET Core apps hosted in IIS use the [ASP.NET Core Module](xref:host-and-deploy/aspnet-core-module) to forward all requests to the app, including static file requests. The IIS static file handler isn't used. It has no chance to handle requests before they're handled by the module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ASP.NET Core apps hosted in IIS use the [ASP.NET Core Module](xref:host-and-deploy/aspnet-core-module) to forward all requests to the app, including static file requests. The IIS static file handler isn't used and has no chance to handle requests.
```

* Complete the following steps in IIS Manager to remove the IIS static file handler at the server or website level:
    1. Navigate to the **Modules** feature.
    1. Select **StaticFileModule** in the list.
    1. Click **Remove** in the **Actions** sidebar.

> [!WARNING]
> If the IIS static file handler is enabled **and** the ASP.NET Core Module is configured incorrectly, static files are served. This happens, for example, if the *web.config* file isn't deployed.

> * Place code files (including *.cs* and *.cshtml*) outside of the app project's [web root](xref:fundamentals/index#web-root). A logical separation is therefore created between the app's client-side content and server-based code. This prevents server-side code from being leaked.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Place code files, including *.cs* and *.cshtml*, outside of the app project's [web root](xref:fundamentals/index#web-root). A logical separation is therefore created between the app's client-side content and server-based code. This prevents server-side code from being leaked.
```
